## 1. What is gene therapy? 
Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/embryo. Typically, genes are inserted in a person's cells and tissues to treat the disease as the delivered genes in the embryo/individual take over the function and compensate for non-functional gene. 

## 2. Give one example of disease which can be cured by gene therapy. 
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency can be cured by gene therapy. 

## 3. What is the reason of ADA deficiency disease? 
This disorder is caused due to deletion of the gene for adenosine deaminase.

## 4. What are the different ways by which we can treat ADA deficiency disease? 
ADA deficiency disease can be treated in the following ways: 

1. **Bone marrow transplantation**: bone marrow from a donor is transplanted to the patient to allow his body to make the enzyme. 
2. **Enzyme Replacement Therapy**: functional ADA enzyme is directly injected into the patient. 
3. **Hematopoietic Stem Cell Gene Editing**: blood stem cells are taken from the patient and genetically modified to produce ADA enzyme and injected back to the patient. 
4. **Gene Therapy**: if the disorder is detected in early embryonic stages, then it can be introduced with gene isolated from bone marrow cells producing ADA to cure it permanently. 

## 5. What is molecular diagnosis? What are its advantages? 
Molecular diagnosis is a method which included diagnoses such as PCR and ELISA to detect a disease at the early stages and using proper treatment to avoid its proliferation and cure it without getting any symptoms.  
Its main advantage is that it can help to treat a disease when it's very weak and therefore, a person doesn't has to be bedridden and treated with other drugs. 

## 6. What are the different tools of molecular diagnosis? 
Molecular diagnosis includes tools like PCR, ELISA and gene sequencing. 

## 7. What are the principal of ELISA and PCR test? 
1. **ELISA**: it works on the principal of antigen-antibody interaction where it binds to a certain antibody where it is detected and shown its presence. 
2. **PCR**: it amplifies specific nucleic acid through repeated cycles of heating and cooling, allowing the detection of even small amounts of target nucleic acid by synthesizing and measuring its increased presence. 

## 8. Name the first transgenic cow and why is it so important? 
The first transgenic cow was named Rosie. It was a significant achievement as it produced human protein-enriched milk which contains human $\alpha$-lactalbumin which is more nutritional for human babies than typical cow milk. 

## 9. Name the recombinant protein that is used to treat emphysema.
$\alpha$-1-antitrypsin is used to treat emphysema. 

## 10. Write down the full form of GEAC and its function. 
GEAC stands for Genetic Engineering Approval Committee. Its moderates and makes decision regarding the validity of genetic modification research and the safety of introducing GMO for public services.

## 11. What is bio-piracy? 
It is a term used to refer to use of bio-resources by multinational companies and other organizations without proper authorization from countries and people concerned without compensatory payment.