## 1. What is elution?
The separated bands of DNA are cut out from agarose gel and extracted from the gel piece to purify the DNA fragment to be used in constructing recombinant DNA. This is known as elution. 

## 2. Name the dye used in gel electrophoresis to visualize DNA fragments. 
Ethidium bromide 

## 3. What is the sources of restriction enzymes and how it its name given? 
The source of restriction enzymes are from bacterium such as *Escherichia coli* which is used to make EcoR1.  
To name this, the first letter is from the genus name, next two letters are from species name, third uppercase letter is the strain of the bacterium and the last number is the order it is obtained. 

## 4. What is palindromic sequence? Give one example of it. 
A palindromic sequence of DNA is a sequence of base pair that reads the same on the two strands when orientation of reading is the same. Eg- RADAR. 

## 5. Name any two vector. 
pBR322 & agrobacterium. 

## 6. Explain the following terms - explant, totipotent, somaclone, somatic hybrid. 
- **Explant**: a sample of tissue from a plant used for cloning. 
- **Totipotent**: the ability to propagate the whole of an organism from a single cell. 
- **Somaclone**: the clone of a plant obtained from an explant. 
- **Somatic hybrid**: a genetically modified clone made from a somaclone. 

## 7. Which part of the plant is generally selected for tissue culture and why? 
The axial meristem is used for tissue culture as it is a rapidly multiplying tissue and doesn't generally contain infected cells from bacteria. 

## 8. State the importance of golden rice. 
Golden rice is a GMO which has high nutritional value, i.e., vitamin A. 

## 9. Name the insects controlled by the protein produced by- cryIAc, cryIIAb, cryIAb.
cryIAc and cryIIAb control bollworms and cryIAb controls corn borer. 

## 10. The toxin produced by cry gene of BT is unable to kill the bacteria itself. Why? 
The toxin produced by the bacteria are protoxin which are inactive and only becomes active when the insect ingests it. 

## 11. How does the protein produced by BT kill pest?
The protein produced by BT binds to the surface of midgut epithelial cells and create pores that cause cell swelling and lysis and eventually kill the insect/pest. 

## 12. Write down the steps involved in RNAi.
1. dsRNA is introduced to the cell and is recognized and cut into small interfering RNA. 
2. The introduced dsRNA prevents the translation of the mRNA. 
3. When the RNA complimentary to mRNA binds, it leads to the later's degradation and silences the gene associated with it. 

## 13. Name the nematode that generally destroys the roots of tobacco plant. 
*Meloidegyne incognitia*

## 14. Write down the steps of production of genetically engineered insulin. 
1. The human gene involved in insulin production is isolated and inserted into a plasmid. 
2. The recombinant plasmid is introduced into E. coli bacteria, which enables it to take up and express the gene. 
3. The bacteria is then allowed to grow in bioreactor, extracted, purified and prepared for medical use. 

## 15. What is the difference between insulin and pro-insulin. 
Pro-insulin is an inactive insulin that contains C peptide which prevents it from being functional. Upon requirement, the body breaks down the C peptide which separates the A and B peptides which are the mature and active insulin. 