English/Grammar/formal-reply.md, before:

# 12/11/24

### Q/ You've received an invitation to be the judge of a literary competition in St. Ann's School. Send a reply in not more than 50 words confirming your acceptance or refusal. You are Mohan/Mohini.

- **Confirmation**

St. Ann's School  
Kerala 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Mohan Sharma would like to thank the Principal, St. Ann's School for their kind invitation for judging their literary competition on 26th November, 2024. He accepts the invitation with pleasure and will reach the venue at 9 am. 

Regards  
Mohan Sharma

- **Refusal**

St. Ann's School  
Kerala 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Mohan Sharma would like to thank the Principal, St. Ann's School for their kind invitation for judging their literary competition on 26th November, 2024. However, he sincerely apologizes that he will not be able to come on the stage the event due to a prior commitment. He wishes good luck to all the participants for the literary competition. 

Regards  
Mohan Sharma

### Q/ Write a formal invitation acceptance to a 'Musical Nite' organized by Rotary Club, Bengaluru. 

Rotary Club  
Bengaluru 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Rohan Das would like to thank to the Rotary Club of Bengaluru for their invitation to 'Musical Nite' on 20th November, 2024. He accepts the invitation with pleasure and will reach the venue at 8 pm. 

Regards  
Rohan Das

Commit message:

Added first person replies and fixed the styling

English/Grammar/formal-reply.md, after:

# 12/11/24

## Q/ You've received an invitation to be the judge of a literary competition in St. Ann's School. Send a reply in not more than 50 words confirming your acceptance or refusal. You are Mohan/Mohini.

- **Confirmation**

St. Ann's School  
Kerala 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Mohan Sharma would like to thank the Principal, St. Ann's School for their kind invitation for judging their literary competition on 26th November, 2024. He accepts the invitation with pleasure and will reach the venue at 9 am. 

Regards  
Mohan Sharma

- **Refusal**

St. Ann's School  
Kerala 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Mohan Sharma would like to thank the Principal, St. Ann's School for their kind invitation for judging their literary competition on 26th November, 2024. However, he sincerely apologizes that he will not be able to come on the stage the event due to a prior commitment. He wishes good luck to all the participants for the literary competition. 

Regards  
Mohan Sharma

## Q/ Write a formal invitation acceptance to a 'Musical Nite' organized by Rotary Club, Bengaluru. 

Rotary Club  
Bengaluru 

12th November, 2024 

Mr. Rohan Das would like to thank to the Rotary Club of Bengaluru for their invitation to 'Musical Nite' on 20th November, 2024. He accepts the invitation with pleasure and will reach the venue at 8 pm. 

Regards  
Rohan Das

## Q/ You are ABC and have been invited to the Science Exhibition to XYZ school as a Chief Guest. Write a letter of acceptance and refusal for the proposal in first person. 

- Acceptance 

XYZ School  
\<Location\>

12th February, 2025 

I would like to extend my sincere gratitude to the Principal of XYZ School for the invitation to be the Chief Guest at the Science Exhibition on 20th February, 2025. I am delighted to accept the invitation and will be present at the venue by 10 am. 

Regards  
ABC

- Refusal 

XYZ School  
\<Location\>

12th February, 2025 

I sincerely thank the Principal of XYZ School for the kind invitation to be the Chief Guest at the Science Exhibition on 20th February, 2025. However, due to prior commitment, I regret that I will not be able to attend. I extend my best wishes for the success of the event. 

Regards  
ABC
