extra/physical-education/1-management-of-sporting-events.md, before:

# Management of Sporting Events
- **Management** is a **dynamic social process** involving **planning, regulation, and coordination** to achieve objectives efficiently.  
- **Sports Management** plays a **crucial role** in ensuring the **success of sports events**.  
- It involves:  
  - **Organizing resources** effectively.  
  - **General planning** of activities.  
  - **Facilitating communication** and coordination.  
- **Sports organizations** rely on management to ensure the **smooth flow of activities** and overall **sports development**.

# Definitions of Management and Sports Management
1. **MC Farland**: "Management is the process by which managers create, direct, maintain, and operate purposive organizations through systematic, coordinated, and cooperative human effort." 
2. **George Terry**: "Management is a process as planning, organizing, actualizing, and controlling to determine and accomplish the objectives of the use of people and resources." 
3. **P. Chelladurai**: "Sports management can be defined as the corrdination of resources, technologies, processes, personal, and situational contingencies for the efficient production and exchange of sports services." 

**Management is the systematic coordination of people, resources, and processes to achieve objectives efficiently. In sports, it ensures the effective organization, planning, and execution of activities for successful events and services.**

# Functions of Sports Events Management (Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Controlling)
The function of management is to make sure that every process of the event goes smoothly, it has the following bodies, 

1. **Planning**: 
    - Sets the pace for further steps
    - Works as a roadmap in attaining organizational goal 
    - Plans in advance what to do and when to do 
    - Evaluate methods and strategies to reach the goal
    - It helps to reduce errors to a large extent
    - Avoids confusion, uncertainities, wastages and risks 
2. **Organizing**: 
    - It is a process of bringing physical, financial, human resources and developing good relationship among them for organizational goal. 
    - Determines how tasks are need to be completed before assigning staff/officials on the duty
    - It is the process of identifcation of activities, classification of grouping aof activities and assignment of duties. 
3. **Staffing**: 
    - One of the most important body in sports event management 
    - Main purpose is to put the right man at the right job at the right time.
        - Makes sure to provide right job according to the person's ability, talent, aptitude (natural ability), and specializations. 
        - Makes it beneficial for the organization to achieve pre-set goals in a proper way. 
4. **Directing**: 
    - Is the heart of management function. 
    - All other branch has no importance without directing. 
    - Refers to the process of instructing, inspiring, guiding, counselling, motivating, and leading all individuals (offices) towards organizational goal.
    - **Communication, supervision, motivation, and leadership** are the essential elements of directing.
        - These elements help employees related to field of sports management to perform duties efficiently and effectively.
5. **Controlling**:
    - Makes sure the event doesn't deviate from pre-arranged plans. 
    - Makes sure performance is set to standards and if not, takes corrective measures.
    - Manager of sports organization needs to monitor and evaluate the activities of his subordinates.
    - **Features:**
        - Helps to achieve organizational goals
        - Sets discipline and order
        - Establishing standards, measurement of actual performance
        - Comparing of actual performance with the standard and taking action

# Varius Committees and their Responsibilities [Pre, During and Post]
Various committees are formed for the systematic and smooth conduct of sports events. Generally, a **Management Committees** exists which consists of one representative from each institution concerned, which takes complete responsibility for the success of an event. It formss various committees and delegates a variety of work among them. 

- The General Committee is headed by an **Administrative Director** under whom **Executive Committee** performs its duties.
    - The **Organizing Committee** for games/sports works under **Executive Committee**.

The Organizing Committee is responsible for the successful and smooth conduct of sports meets/events. Various committies are formed under it:

1. **Publicity Committee**: Announce date, venues and sports events, provides, advance information to institutions, undertakes printing, advertise sports events, etc. 
2. **Transportation Committee**: Provides facilities regarding transportation of various teams to venue of sports events or to place of boarding and lodging. 
3. **Boarding and Lodging Committee**: Responsible for making necessary arrangements for providing accommodation and serving meals to sportspersons and officials. 
4. **Deccoration and Ceremony Committee**: Responsible for decoration of sports arena or stabium; also responsible for making necessary arrangements for opening ceremony, victory ceremony and closing ceremony. This committee also makes arrangements for trophies, medals and certificates. 
5. **Grounds and Equipment Committee**: Responsible for preparing the grounds or laying out track and field. Also makes arrangements of equipments related to the game/athletic needs. The also need to provide equipment according to specifications. 
6. **Committee for Refreshments and Entertainment**: Takes charge for supplying refreshments and drinks to officials, guests, competitiors, etc. They also have to make arrangement for entainment programmes during opening and closing ceremony. 
7. **Reception Committee**: Responsible for welcoming chief guests at opening and closing ceremonies and also guests and spectators. 
8. **Committee on Entries and Programmes**: sends retry forms to various institutions early and receives them on time, alots numbers to the competitors and arranges the seats for guests and spectators. Prepares fixtures for participating teams, and creates complete programme related to games/sports events which gets printed. They also prepare souvenirs and circulates them among guests, managers of teams and officials. 
9. **Committee for Officials**: This selects various officials such as referees, time keepers, lap scorers for athletic meets and referees, umpires, recorders, judges, etc. 
10. **Announcement Committee**: Responsible for making various announcements during events, gives information regarding opening and closing ceermonies, even schedule announcement, name of officials, who are conducting the event and running commentary of the event. 
11. **First Aid Committee**: headed by a well-qualified doctor, this committee provides first aid to injured or affected athlete/sportspersons immediately. This committee makes all necessary arrangements to be ready all time during the event.
12. **Finance Committee**: prepares budget and maintains the account of income and expenditure.

# Pre, During and Post Tournament Responsibilities of Committees
Frequency of sports events are increasing and it is the responsibility of officials to make it unique. Therefore, for smooth conduct, it is important for officials to know the pre, during and post game duties. 

## Pre-Tournament Responsibilities
1. To prepare budget for the event with the authority.
2. To prepare the schedule of the event, i.e., dates and venue of the tournament.
3. To prepare sports ground/track/courts, sports equipment. 
4. To form various committees for organizing the event. 
5. Send information to various teams about dates and venues of the event. 
6. Make necessary arrangement regarding boarding and lodging of sportspersons and officials. 
7. Arrange prizes and certificates for winners. 
8. Send entry forms to various institutions early and receive them on time for timely prepararation of fixtures.

## During Tournament Responsibilities
1. Ensure proper arrangement during inauguration of sports tournament.
2. Check that the sports ground/fiedl/court and realted sports equipment are in order. 
3. Ensure that the sports event is being organized as per schedule.
4. Check the arrangement of refreshments to players and officials. 
5. Make necessary announcement regarding the progress of the tournament.
6. Prepare proper scoresheet for record. 
7. Provide and update information to electonic and print media.
8. Maintain proper discipline. 

## Post Tournament Responsibilities 
1. Give away prizes and certificates to winners. 
2. Provide detailed results and other necessary information to the media. 
3. Provide security refunds to the departing teams. 
4. Collect all records/files related to the event. 
5. Make the payments to officials and other concerned persons. 
6. Prepare reports related to expenditure of the event. 
7. Present mementos to chief guest, guest of honor, etc. 

# Procedure to draw Fixtures: Knock-out (Bye and Seeding) and League (Cyclic, Staircase and Tabular)
## Knock-out Tournament 
- Essential points for Knock-out Tournament 
    1. Total number of teams participating in the tournament. 
    2. Total number of byes.
    3. Number of teams in each half or quarter.
    4. Number of byes to be given in each half or quarter.
    5. Total number of rounds.
    6. Total number of matches. 

### Method of Preparing Fixture 
- Finding number of byes:
    1. Get the nearest exponent of 2 greater than the total number of teams.
    2. Subtract the total number of teams from the exponent of 2.
    3. The resulting number will the number of byes. 

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- If the total number of teams can't be divided equally, 
    - **Teams in upper half**: $\frac{\text{Total number of teams} + 1}{2}$
    - **Teams in lower half**: $\frac{\text{Total number of teams} - 1}{2}$

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- **Total number of matches**: $\text{Total number of teams} - 1$
- **Number of rounds**:
    1. If number of teams is exponent of 2, it is the number of 2 present in LCM of the number of teams. 
    2. If number of teams isn't an exponent of 2, the number of rounds will be the next larger LCM of the exponent of 2 

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- **Number of byes in upper half**: $\frac{NB-1}{2}$
- **Number of byes in lower half**: $\frac{NB+1}{2}$

### Method of Fixing Byes 
1. First bye is given to first team of lower half. 
2. Second bye is given to the last team of lower half. 
3. Third bye is give to the first team of upper half. 
4. Fourth bye is given to the last team of upper half. 
5. For next byes, repeat in the same order. 

### Number of Teams in Each Quarter 
If the number of teams is large, then they are divided into quarters. The following steps are taken to divide them, 

1. 4 Quarters are drawn. 
2. Teams are divided equally into 4 quarters with equal number of teams. 
3. If remaining team is 1, then it is put to the first quarter. 
4. If remaining teams is 2, then they are put into quarter I and III respectively. 
5. If remaining teams is 3, then they are put to quarters I, II, and III respectively. 

## Definitions
1. **Bye**: it is special privilege given to a team in the initial rounds because of which it gets exempted from playing in the first round and directly enters the second round. 
2. **Tournament**: a competition involving many competitors in a single sport.
3. **Fixture**: defined as schedule of teams taking part in the tournament and the methods of deciding the course of competition. 
4. **Seeding**: given to specific teams or those teams which are winner/runner up team of last year's tournaments. These teams are placed in such a manner that they don't meet another stronger team in the first round. If a bye is not given to them, then it will have to participate in the first round. 
5. **Special seeding**: in this seeding, the special players are brought straight away to quarterfinals or semifinals.
6. **Planning**: it is an intellectual process of deciding in advance what is to be done, who is to do it, how it is to be done and when it is to be done?

Commit message:

Added about knock-out tournament
Added about knock-out tournament and fixed alignment

extra/physical-education/1-management-of-sporting-events.md, after:

# Management of Sporting Events
- **Management** is a **dynamic social process** involving **planning, regulation, and coordination** to achieve objectives efficiently.  
- **Sports Management** plays a **crucial role** in ensuring the **success of sports events**.  
- It involves:  
  - **Organizing resources** effectively.  
  - **General planning** of activities.  
  - **Facilitating communication** and coordination.  
- **Sports organizations** rely on management to ensure the **smooth flow of activities** and overall **sports development**.

# Definitions of Management and Sports Management
1. **MC Farland**: "Management is the process by which managers create, direct, maintain, and operate purposive organizations through systematic, coordinated, and cooperative human effort." 
2. **George Terry**: "Management is a process as planning, organizing, actualizing, and controlling to determine and accomplish the objectives of the use of people and resources." 
3. **P. Chelladurai**: "Sports management can be defined as the corrdination of resources, technologies, processes, personal, and situational contingencies for the efficient production and exchange of sports services." 

**Management is the systematic coordination of people, resources, and processes to achieve objectives efficiently. In sports, it ensures the effective organization, planning, and execution of activities for successful events and services.**

# Functions of Sports Events Management (Planning, Organizing, Staffing, Directing, Controlling)
The function of management is to make sure that every process of the event goes smoothly, it has the following bodies, 

1. **Planning**: 
    - Sets the pace for further steps
    - Works as a roadmap in attaining organizational goal 
    - Plans in advance what to do and when to do 
    - Evaluate methods and strategies to reach the goal
    - It helps to reduce errors to a large extent
    - Avoids confusion, uncertainities, wastages and risks 
2. **Organizing**: 
    - It is a process of bringing physical, financial, human resources and developing good relationship among them for organizational goal. 
    - Determines how tasks are need to be completed before assigning staff/officials on the duty
    - It is the process of identifcation of activities, classification of grouping aof activities and assignment of duties. 
3. **Staffing**: 
    - One of the most important body in sports event management 
    - Main purpose is to put the right man at the right job at the right time.
        - Makes sure to provide right job according to the person's ability, talent, aptitude (natural ability), and specializations. 
        - Makes it beneficial for the organization to achieve pre-set goals in a proper way. 
4. **Directing**: 
    - Is the heart of management function. 
    - All other branch has no importance without directing. 
    - Refers to the process of instructing, inspiring, guiding, counselling, motivating, and leading all individuals (offices) towards organizational goal.
    - **Communication, supervision, motivation, and leadership** are the essential elements of directing.
        - These elements help employees related to field of sports management to perform duties efficiently and effectively.
5. **Controlling**:
    - Makes sure the event doesn't deviate from pre-arranged plans. 
    - Makes sure performance is set to standards and if not, takes corrective measures.
    - Manager of sports organization needs to monitor and evaluate the activities of his subordinates.
    - **Features:**
        - Helps to achieve organizational goals
        - Sets discipline and order
        - Establishing standards, measurement of actual performance
        - Comparing of actual performance with the standard and taking action

# Varius Committees and their Responsibilities [Pre, During and Post]
Various committees are formed for the systematic and smooth conduct of sports events. Generally, a **Management Committees** exists which consists of one representative from each institution concerned, which takes complete responsibility for the success of an event. It formss various committees and delegates a variety of work among them. 

- The General Committee is headed by an **Administrative Director** under whom **Executive Committee** performs its duties.
    - The **Organizing Committee** for games/sports works under **Executive Committee**.

The Organizing Committee is responsible for the successful and smooth conduct of sports meets/events. Various committies are formed under it:

1. **Publicity Committee**: Announce date, venues and sports events, provides, advance information to institutions, undertakes printing, advertise sports events, etc. 
2. **Transportation Committee**: Provides facilities regarding transportation of various teams to venue of sports events or to place of boarding and lodging. 
3. **Boarding and Lodging Committee**: Responsible for making necessary arrangements for providing accommodation and serving meals to sportspersons and officials. 
4. **Deccoration and Ceremony Committee**: Responsible for decoration of sports arena or stabium; also responsible for making necessary arrangements for opening ceremony, victory ceremony and closing ceremony. This committee also makes arrangements for trophies, medals and certificates. 
5. **Grounds and Equipment Committee**: Responsible for preparing the grounds or laying out track and field. Also makes arrangements of equipments related to the game/athletic needs. The also need to provide equipment according to specifications. 
6. **Committee for Refreshments and Entertainment**: Takes charge for supplying refreshments and drinks to officials, guests, competitiors, etc. They also have to make arrangement for entainment programmes during opening and closing ceremony. 
7. **Reception Committee**: Responsible for welcoming chief guests at opening and closing ceremonies and also guests and spectators. 
8. **Committee on Entries and Programmes**: sends retry forms to various institutions early and receives them on time, alots numbers to the competitors and arranges the seats for guests and spectators. Prepares fixtures for participating teams, and creates complete programme related to games/sports events which gets printed. They also prepare souvenirs and circulates them among guests, managers of teams and officials. 
9. **Committee for Officials**: This selects various officials such as referees, time keepers, lap scorers for athletic meets and referees, umpires, recorders, judges, etc. 
10. **Announcement Committee**: Responsible for making various announcements during events, gives information regarding opening and closing ceermonies, even schedule announcement, name of officials, who are conducting the event and running commentary of the event. 
11. **First Aid Committee**: headed by a well-qualified doctor, this committee provides first aid to injured or affected athlete/sportspersons immediately. This committee makes all necessary arrangements to be ready all time during the event.
12. **Finance Committee**: prepares budget and maintains the account of income and expenditure.

# Pre, During and Post Tournament Responsibilities of Committees
Frequency of sports events are increasing and it is the responsibility of officials to make it unique. Therefore, for smooth conduct, it is important for officials to know the pre, during and post game duties. 

## Pre-Tournament Responsibilities
1. To prepare budget for the event with the authority.
2. To prepare the schedule of the event, i.e., dates and venue of the tournament.
3. To prepare sports ground/track/courts, sports equipment. 
4. To form various committees for organizing the event. 
5. Send information to various teams about dates and venues of the event. 
6. Make necessary arrangement regarding boarding and lodging of sportspersons and officials. 
7. Arrange prizes and certificates for winners. 
8. Send entry forms to various institutions early and receive them on time for timely prepararation of fixtures.

## During Tournament Responsibilities
1. Ensure proper arrangement during inauguration of sports tournament.
2. Check that the sports ground/fiedl/court and realted sports equipment are in order. 
3. Ensure that the sports event is being organized as per schedule.
4. Check the arrangement of refreshments to players and officials. 
5. Make necessary announcement regarding the progress of the tournament.
6. Prepare proper scoresheet for record. 
7. Provide and update information to electonic and print media.
8. Maintain proper discipline. 

## Post Tournament Responsibilities 
1. Give away prizes and certificates to winners. 
2. Provide detailed results and other necessary information to the media. 
3. Provide security refunds to the departing teams. 
4. Collect all records/files related to the event. 
5. Make the payments to officials and other concerned persons. 
6. Prepare reports related to expenditure of the event. 
7. Present mementos to chief guest, guest of honor, etc. 

# Procedure to draw Fixtures: Knock-out (Bye and Seeding) and League (Cyclic, Staircase and Tabular)
## Knock-out Tournament 
- Essential points for Knock-out Tournament 
    1. Total number of teams participating in the tournament. 
    2. Total number of byes.
    3. Number of teams in each half or quarter.
    4. Number of byes to be given in each half or quarter.
    5. Total number of rounds.
    6. Total number of matches. 

### Method of Preparing Fixture 
- Finding number of byes:
    1. Get the nearest exponent of 2 greater than the total number of teams.
    2. Subtract the total number of teams from the exponent of 2.
    3. The resulting number will the number of byes. 

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- If the total number of teams can't be divided equally, 
    - **Teams in upper half**: $\frac{\text{Total number of teams} + 1}{2}$
    - **Teams in lower half**: $\frac{\text{Total number of teams} - 1}{2}$

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- **Total number of matches**: $\text{Total number of teams} - 1$
- **Number of rounds**:
    1. If number of teams is exponent of 2, it is the number of 2 present in LCM of the number of teams. 
    2. If number of teams isn't an exponent of 2, the number of rounds will be the next larger LCM of the exponent of 2 

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- **Number of byes in upper half**: $\frac{NB-1}{2}$
- **Number of byes in lower half**: $\frac{NB+1}{2}$

<div style="page-break-after: always"></div>

- **Number of matches**: $\text{Total number of teams} - 1$

### Method of Fixing Byes 
1. First bye is given to first team of lower half. 
2. Second bye is given to the last team of lower half. 
3. Third bye is give to the first team of upper half. 
4. Fourth bye is given to the last team of upper half. 
5. For next byes, repeat in the same order. 

### Number of Teams in Each Quarter 
If the number of teams is large, then they are divided into quarters. The following steps are taken to divide them, 

1. 4 Quarters are drawn. 
2. Teams are divided equally into 4 quarters with equal number of teams. 
3. If remaining team is 1, then it is put to the first quarter. 
4. If remaining teams is 2, then they are put into quarter I and III respectively. 
5. If remaining teams is 3, then they are put to quarters I, II, and III respectively. 

### Definitions
1. **Bye**: it is special privilege given to a team in the initial rounds because of which it gets exempted from playing in the first round and directly enters the second round. 
2. **Tournament**: a competition involving many competitors in a single sport.
3. **Fixture**: defined as schedule of teams taking part in the tournament and the methods of deciding the course of competition. 
4. **Seeding**: given to specific teams or those teams which are winner/runner up team of last year's tournaments. These teams are placed in such a manner that they don't meet another stronger team in the first round. If a bye is not given to them, then it will have to participate in the first round. 
5. **Special seeding**: in this seeding, the special players are brought straight away to quarterfinals or semifinals.
6. **Planning**: it is an intellectual process of deciding in advance what is to be done, who is to do it, how it is to be done and when it is to be done?

### Consolation Tournament 
- **Requirement**: a good team plays with another good team in the first round and the one that loses get a setback. Therefore, Consolation tournament is held as an additioal chance given to the defeated team, among which, a winner is declared.

A Consolation tournament is of two types: 

1. **First Type**: each team gets two opportunities to play matches, one in the actual tournament and the other in the Consolation tournament; only if the team was defeated in the first round. Byes are given to those teams which didn't get bye in regular knock-out tournament. 
    - **Consolation Round**: In this, the procedure is the same as regular tournament and byes are given to required teams. 

2. **Second type**: in this Consolation tournament, the teams defeated in all the rounds get opportunity to take part in competition.
    - **Consolation Round**: The teams defeated in the first round compete against each other, continued by the team defeated in the second and third round against the winning team. 

### Seeding Method 
- **Requirement**: sometimes, all strong teams or all weak teams might be grouped in upper or lower half. This causes the strong teams to be eliminated in the preliminary round. To avoid this, special seeding method is used where strong teams are kept at appropriate place in the fixture. 
- **Method**: to perform special seeding, the organizers must be aware of the team's previous performance. If two teams are seeded, one is kept in the top of upper half and the other in bottom of lower half. If 4 teams are seeded, first two are in the same way, and the third team is kept on the top of the lower half and the fourth seeded team is kept at the lowest place in the upper half. All the teams except the seeded teams are kept in the fixture by lots. 

### Special Seeding 
It is the process by which strongest players or teams are placed at appropriate places in the fixture. To avoid elimination of those teams in previous rounds, the are given opportunity to participate directly in quarter or semi finals.
